>> Richard Feldman: So
part three, creating constraints.
We'll talk about a few things here.
First, we're gonna talk
about units of measure.
And we're gonna talk
about accessible HTML.
Then the Never type.
And finally, type parameter design.
Okay, so this right here is
the Mars Climate Orbiter.
I should say the ill-fated
Mars Climate Orbiter.
A bad thing happened to this,
because there were two different
teams of programmers working on it.
And one of the teams put some of their
units in imperial units like inches and
feet, and stuff, and the others
used the SI units of centimeters,
and millimeters, and so forth.
And they got their units mixed up, and
so their calculations when they sort of
put them together didn't end up giving
it the right numbers, and so it crashed.
So that's a bummer, and
it would have been nice if we could
have averted that disaster by
having some way to prevent ourselves
from mixing up our units of measure.
So here's a way we can do that using Elm.
The server defining
a type called length and
length has a type parameter called
units or a type variable called units.
And all it holds inside is two things.
One, is it holds on to a float,
which can be actual measurements itself.
And then it's holding into
another guide for the units.
Now, let's separately define type
four centimeters, type for inches.
And just like we had in
the previous example with preview.
We're gonna have these just defined
with a single variant that doesn't hold
on anything.
Since are just place holders.
So they're just there to
describe the units themselves.
They don't actually hold
any information themselves.
So we can write a function that called
centimeters, which is sort of convenience
that takes a float and
gives you back the length of centimeters.
Same thing with inches.
Give limitations of those
just be to take the float,
put it inside this length variant, and
then the hard code centimeters in this
case and inches in the other case for
the units value.
>> Richard Feldman: We could also
write a function called Add,
which we won't get in the implementation
just yet, but it would have this type.
It would say length units to length units.
And so if you gave it some different
things that had the same units.
They would work out.
So I could say it like add 5
centimeters and 12 centimeters.
And that'll work out and
give me some answer that had a length
centimeters, which is what I want.
And I could also do the same thing with
inches, say add inches 5, inches 12 and
that would work out.
But if I tried to do centimeters for
one, inches for
the other, those would not unify and
it would give me a compile error.
Okay, so
here's one way we can implement add.
We can say add and then immediately
destructure this one variant with num1,
which would be the float of the first one,
and then num2, for the second one.
And we can also have units1 and
units2, which we know from the type,
are going to be the same thing.
So we can return length and just by chance
we decided to pick units1 there, but
we could have picked either one,
we could have also said it returns units2.
Another way we could do this is
what's known as a phantom type.
Now that transition was pretty quick,
so let me just go back and forth so
you can see it too.
So this is with the phantom type and
this is without phantom type, without.
So the difference is phantom type version,
we still have units up
here in the type of length, but
we don't actually have it in the variant.
We don't use it, it just sits up there
being constrained, being all constrainty,
but it doesn't actually exist
anywhere in the implementation.
It's something that we're defining
at the type level purely for
the benefit of opting into a constraint
that we're going to enforce
by other means than what's
actually inside there.
So again going back and forth.
So this version actually
holds on to some units.
This version doesn't.
This version has to
pattern match on those.
It has to pull the units out and
this one pulls it out in both places,
whereas the other one doesn't.
And then, of course, the first one ends up
needing to provide that to the variants,
so that we can actually construct
one of these length values.
Which it does, and
it arbitrarily chooses units one,
but it could just have
easily have chosen units2.
Whereas this one doesn't
provide that at all.
So this sorta begs the question,
okay, well in this version,
we can see that it needs to be at least
returning some sort of units here,
either units1 or units2.
But this one doesn't
need to be doing that.
So when it says that it takes
length units and length units and
returns length units, why is that true?
I mean, is that just some sort of made up
nonsense like really, couldn't we write
just as easily write this one,
where it claims to take ab and return c?
Yeah, we could.
So in actuality,
there is no constraint on length,
like in a to the way that we
designed this implementation.
The whole point of the phantom type,
is that it's a constraint that is sort of
free floating, does not exist by default,
doesn't do anything by default.
But when you write type annotations in
Elm, you have the choice of choosing to
make them more constrained than
they have to be if you want to.
And the compiler will respect that.
So most of the time in Elm, when you
write a type annotation, it's just for
documentation.
And you're gonna put down pretty close to
exactly what the compiler would infer.
However, there are some examples like this
where it might make sense for you to say,
you know what, I know that technically, I
could have length of one thing and length
of another thing as the two arguments
in return, a length of a third thing.
And I don't really care what they are,
doesn't really matter.
I'm just gonna ignore them anyway so,
whatever.
Just give me anything,
give me centimeters,
millimeters, feet, uers, I don't care.
I doesn't matter because I'm not
gonna use those values anyway.
You could do that but then you would
be defeating the entire purpose of this
design, which is that the whole point here
is that we want them to be constrained.
We want to enforce that they
are the same in all three cases, or
rather the case of the two arguments.
Because otherwise it's entirely possible
that you will give centimeters on one
side and inches on the other side.
And there's still compile
they just will result in it
unfortunately crushed miles pro.
So the trade off here is that here we
have a little bit more enforcement.
Its worth noting though that although
we have a little bit more enforcement,
we still have to constrain this
add type annotation artificially.
So notice that we chose
arbitrarily to return units1 here.
Because of that, really, in actuality,
we could change the length
of this other one to say,
length units2, or length b or length x,
and then return the length units.
Really, we are still artificially
constraining this one on purpose, and
opting in to saying actually,
no, I promised,
those second ones need to be there.
And this is sort of a natural consequence
of having types that we don't really
end up using in our actual calculations,
or anything like that.
So this implementation at least requires
that the return value is going to be
one of the two that we gave it, but
it's still not sort of innately as
constrained as we've made it here.
In either implementation,
the phantom type, or
the non-phantom type version, we have to
sort of opt into constraining it more.
If we want it to actually do its
job of preventing the type mismatch
between the inches,
the imperial units and the SI units.
Okay, so keeping on that mind, what
are the tradeoffs between the two like?
Why would I choose one or the other?
I mean I think the value of having some
sort of enforcement is pretty clear,
we can prevent ourselves
from making the thing crash
due to mixed up units of measure.
However, it's less clear in Italy what the
tradeoffs are or why you might choose to
use the phantom type versus actually
holding on to the units inside the value.
And it's honestly,
the tradeoff really comes down to
the degree of flexibility that the phantom
types give you and also there is a little
bit of a performance aspect to it.
So in Elm, when you have a custom
type with a single variant,
and that variant holds onto one value.
That's sort of a trivial type,
you look at this and you say yeah,
this is just a wrapper
around this one type.
Do we really need that
wrapper at run time?
And the answer is, no we don't.
And so actually when Elm encounters
this specific situation,
a custom type with one variant
that holds on the one value.
It does what's called unboxing, when
you run it, it was dash dash optimize.
Which is to say, this code right here
at compiles sometime is a custom type.
But a run type is just a float,
like it's as if we just said
alias Length = Float at run time.
Now compile is not gonna behave exactly
like a fully box wrapped up custom type
with all the trimmings,
but a compile time,
that's a performance
optimization I was able to do.
Because it says well we'll just substitute
it in there and we already checked to
make sure that it's gonna be used
consistently across the code base.
So it's fine to just unbox it and
not bother putting that wrapper around it
since the wrapper was only for
the benefit of the compiler anyway.
However, it can't do
that with this version,
because this version is
holding on to two things.
If we were to substitute it with float,
then this other piece of information which
theoretically we might be using
at runtime, would get discarded,
we'd no longer be,
it wouldn't work anymore.
Now, as it happens, we know that we're
not using this thing at runtime, but
the compiler doesn't really have any
way of guaranteeing that ahead of time.
I guess, theoretically,
it might be able to figure out someday but
there's the running joke.
With a sufficiently smart compiler you can
do just about anything, but of course,
compilers don't just build themselves.
So there is a definite
performance advantage here and
the flexibility is both a pro and a con.
On the one hand, the flexibility
to be able to write essentially
whatever type of variables
you want in here.
To make them as constrained or
unconstrained as you like,
it's sort of a blessing and a curse.
On one hand,
it's a blessing in the sense that hey,
you can be as flexible as you want,
maybe we want this.
On the other hand, it's some sets of foot
gun, I can very easily shoot myself in
the foot with this and make it so
that I have defined a type for
add, which completely defeats the entire
purpose of my going down this road anyway.
That makes it so that it's perfectly
possible to mix these units up, and
I won't get any compile time errors.
So, that flexibility is both a pro and
a con.
So essentially the tradeoff between these
two options here is, the phantom type
version where we only hold onto a float
and we do not hold onto the units.
We only have the units as part of the type
variable so that we can constrain it if we
want to, gives us more performance but
fewer guaranties.
It's a little bit easier to
shoot ourselves in the foot.
The other version doesn't quite has good
performance but it does have a little bit
more in the way of guarantees because this
is actually part of the implementation.
Having said that, the performance
difference here is probably not going to
really matter in practice for
almost all use cases.
So I would definitely benchmark before
worrying about this from a performance
perspective.